hello
nice to meet you
thanks for making it today in sunny
barcelona so
what we're going to do today is i'm
going to go over our story
of you know how we started the company
and how we got to series a in such a
short time and then how we became a
unicorn and then desi is going to talk
about some of the
key takeaways that we got from that
stage
so first of all
we are company that is still not four
years old uh we are training for next
month
and we crossed in march the one billion
dollar mark as a company evaluation
so
we started the company with a big idea
we said in order to create a big company
you need to solve a big problem in a big
market and if you can do that then your
company is going to be a function out of
the market that you address and our
first strategy is going to find to find
the company to sorry to build the
company in a way which we can search for
a market which we would like to address
and that was the first key thing for us
we went through then very easy angel
round of 130k
and then we went through 62 rejections
to get our seed round closed in 2019
why 62 i'm going to explain later on
then
when everything was being getting in
lockdown we sent a call for our
investors to send the money for the seed
round and all of them said i hope those
money i'll see them again at some point
in our lifetime
so that was a very key moment
then we managed to go and close the
series a of 20 million
last april and then this year
we managed to get the 100 million
combined rate 250 million series b round
to get to a unicorn state
so the agenda today is to really
together to go through some of the
really key takeaways of what made our
journey possible and what were the
things that were fundamental and
instrumental for us to get things right
very early on
so the first thing is starting with the
right foundation this is something
extremely important especially in the
market environment in which we are today
as you can see what's happening with
tech market if you don't have solid
foundation read that
strong unit economics a really strong
and healthy
strategy on how you're going to attack
the market and making sure you have a a
way
or your way to approach the market is
really important
and then how we build our product in a
way that we make sure that is something
that is differentiated that has a
differentiation it can easily address
the market and it's something that
customers are willing to buy at scale
then how do we work in a regulated
market which is something that is key
for foreign anything that's in financial
services and though then how we
scaled our operation
so the first thing is and this is
extremely important when you're
fundraising and when you're a venture
back company is getting the foundation
right and for us the first idea was that
we're going to go and iterate over a
concept as much as possible
without falling in love in that idea
so
you know we wanted to make sure that we
are
iterating over something we come up with
an idea we go and pitch it to customers
we go and create prototypes we go create
pricing we go create websites but we
don't fall in that the law
we don't fall in love in that idea so
that when customers are rejecting us we
can actually be you know not emotional
about it but rational and we make sure
that hey this is actually something that
the market says which is quite important
then we wanted to make sure we have the
right foundation
so from day one we had a strong team
that have used they they were before uh
we have done multiple products before in
a different environment and we were sure
that if we go in the market we should
find our way to
you know be different and to
differentiate and a key thing for us was
that we wanted to make sure that we can
bring the game to be about software
because in the financial services market
and all the banks everything is about
you know payments and disruption and so
on but our dna as a company was being
able to create software and we we knew
that when you go in a new market
if we bring the game to be about
software then nobody can compete with us
because this is the top of our game
the other thing was very important and
this is something that investors are
really looking at every company is how
you structure and how fair is the setup
if you have a cup table where let's say
you have two co-founders one is only 20
the other 80 that is the recipe for
disaster you need to make sure very
early on that you have a fair split and
when we started the company my
co-founder
boyco one of the co-founders said you
know
out i would be happy to join the company
i'm happy with 20 and i said no you
should have 50 because i need an equal
co-founder who is rightly invested into
this business and we don't optimize on
percentages the question is percentage
of what
because even a hundred percent of zero
is zero right so don't focus on these
micro optimizations and make sure you
have a fair structure the next thing we
did is when we set up the company we put
together reverse vesting for the
founders and we said
we're agreeing before we even start the
company if you leave tomorrow how much
you're going to take away from the
business for the next three years
so that if it's too tough for you or
things are not working or you have other
ideas in life you know and we agree
before we start how things are going to
work out and this is something that
investors appreciate and i think makes
extremely easy the communication
internally because a huge amount of
companies fail because their founders
cannot agree and this is the the first
thing you can prevent in a company and
the next thing we did was we also set up
an employee stock option plan from day
one so we said if we're starting we need
to take the employees fairly as
co-founders of the business and we set
up a dedicated pool from day one and we
set up the scheme how we're going to
distribute that for the first 12
employees which was preconceived without
we have even met the people so we knew
that we are fair with every person we're
getting in the business
um then
obviously we got 62 rejections
over a period of nine months
and it was really hard time you know you
go and you pitch and you explain what
you're doing and you're showing them in
their product and they're saying no
that's not going to work you don't have
this you don't have that we're a company
based in bulgaria
and what what happened for us was that
it was really important for us to really
think about what are the things we have
and what are the links we don't have
so what we don't have is access to a
local market
but on the flip side this means that
from day one we need to be concentrating
on the you know markets that are outside
of burger so from day one we have to be
international and we turn that into our
advantage and we are a company now
focusing on multinational companies and
that's our part of our coordinate
strength
and
what was key during that time with
fundraising is that investors were
saying that's really really hard for you
to be able to penetrate the
international markets all at once based
out of bulgaria
nobody has done that before and so on
and so forth but what was key for us was
to really focus on the customers we
didn't listen that much on what
investors are saying we were listening
what the market is saying which is the
most important thing and
we were in that paradox where you can
see that the customers were really fond
of what we were building and they really
wanted to use that thing while investors
were having any other kind of you know
multiple reasons why this is not going
to work
and that leads us to the most important
thing when you're starting a business
that is fulfillment
getting
your customer
if you are able to pitch something and
then you can somebody engaged
and listening to you and willing to
learn more that is a big big signal that
you are on something big
if you if it takes so much time to
explain maybe you're explaining it to
the wrong guy
change the person or the target persona
or the company size that you're
explaining to and really find and nail
down your target customer
because that is clearly key stay
customer focused so this guy that you
see is actually the ceo of luxembourg
airlines which is a customer
and once you get those customers who are
you know this is a company that is
around for 75 years
but and they have never seen another
product in financial services market
before pay hope they had a bank account
for 70 years and they have never changed
that but if you are able to really
make somebody uh that is obviously not
the uh let's say the perfect customer
right way and you can turn it into a big
believer that is going to be a huge
advantage for you down the road because
this shows you how big the addressable
market is
and on the other side we were really
obsessed about serving those customers
and and getting things into the right
direction
so
how to make change within the rules um
so disrupting a regulated market is
really really hard so what we knew is
that
the next frontiers of big companies are
going to be at the intersection between
industries so it's not going to be only
sas anymore it needs to be sas with
fintech sas with healthcare sas with
biotech or something because anymore now
you know we went through that phase of
scaling sas until 2015 2016 and now that
market gets super saturated everything
is us everything is a software company
and you really need to find the new
pockets where some of those markets are
going to start to converge and this is
what happened for us we identified that
you know company cars accounts
company cars bank payments
expense management spend management
invoice management data extraction
should be actually one system it doesn't
have to be five different markets that
are now and this is where the disruption
comes when you are able to identify
something that is currently being used
and the key thing for us was that we
knew that the finance people were not
take guys they were forced to use four
or five different products at the same
time and that was key for us we said
well why don't we merge those market
categories and of course all the
investors said you guys are crazy those
are four different markets that they
have huge huge competitors and i said
well that's so good for us because we're
addressing a massive market so you guys
should be happy not afraid
and then you need to start thinking a
little bit more about
uh how you can actually measure where
you're going and while you're scaling
fast for a company like payhawk we have
been growing 21 month over month for the
last 20 months
you sometimes lose
uh uh yourself in the data and the
metrics and you really need to nail down
what's your north star and what you're
optimizing and
all of your companies should know about
one of the two goals that you focused on
and this is something that you
communicate to investors and that's
something that you really make sure all
of our if you're using okrs or strategy
or metrics realigns to
and then in terms of bleed scaling our
operations
our strategy was to
have a small team that is fully capable
and we empower those people to focus on
the key things so instead of having a
very heavy organization we said let's go
let's have a very flat organization
let's empower people let's give them
the benefit of the doubt at the
beginning and let's see whether they can
execute and if they cannot
you as a manager and a leader you have
to make sure you have set these people
for success do they have the right
resources do they have the right the
goals that they need to go for and do
they have the tools to achieve that and
you have done that and if those people
are not able to you know go and deliver
then
if you have to let go people it is fair
for both parties and people understand
that but you treat people with respect
and you gave them the opportunity right
away and that make a huge change for for
us so we are a company that is um
last year at that time we were 29
employees
right now we are 200 employees and we
are operating in six markets and that's
not going to be possible if you do not
let go and you focus on the people so
that they can
build on that
on our part was also important to use
everything that is sas
really cut the meantime and the
paperwork and the heavy process as much
as possible because at the beginning you
really need to focus on on the key
metrics and you are not in the business
of managing expenses or being an hr tool
or managing you know
many other things that are excessive and
it was very key for us to be able to
focus on allowing people to do their job
in the most positive in the fastest
possible way
um so now we will go to daisy who is
going to share the key takeaways and
then we'll do a short q a session
um hi and thanks christopher for sharing
all the insights of how we managed to
become a unicorn
it was a really long journey with a lot
of ups and downs and
really a lot of hard work in a very
short time so i actually joined payout
one and a half a year ago and to be
honest it feels like at least 10 years
ago because so much has happened we not
only
raised serial seat round and series b
with a unicorn valuation but also we
grow the team i think when i started we
were 40 people and now we're at 180 14
14 and now we're at 180 and
yeah also we expanded to a lot of new
markets we now have offices in sofia in
london berlin
barcelona actually and amsterdam and
paris
so
i'm certain that we only managed to grow
this fast because we can't get the
foundations right
and also i know that you cannot just
take the success story of us or any
other scale-up and just apply it to
other business models or other founder
teams however there is some like key
success factors and and takeaways i want
to share with you to to also take home
if you want to grow or grow even faster
so let's start with the first takeaway
which is to build a stellar team
so to build an excellent team
is key
so it is an excellent team with the
right skill sets and shared values is
key if you drive
to grow your company and this stellar
team starts with the right founders team
you need a founders team that complement
each other with their skill set
so
so for example if you have a team
of techies you might manage to build an
amazing product and excel in product
development however
maybe you are not able to define a
suitable go to market strategy
so at payout we have this team that
complement each other with their skill
set
with backgrounds coming from product
management engineering and finance
to build a stellar team does not only
mean to build the founder team but
furthermore you have to hire your entire
staff
and when hiring your staff so first of
all obviously
diversity
and besides diversity actually at payout
i think we have 40 women which is quite
unique in the fintech industry in europe
um but besides diversity i would
recommend to start hiring a very senior
first
because you need to
get the right foundations to
to allow to scale after that so so for
example in the marketing team i started
hiring a content director and head of
offline marketing who would then build
the team further
this will allow you to really focus on
scale on getting the marketing strategy
right and
then to further scale
also don't do any compromises when it
comes to hiring you might feel the
pressure to hire very fast
but if you you still should ensure that
you have a lean but still really smart
hiring process because if it comes to um
if you have to let people go or people
go
because of that aligned skill set
or values it will create unnecessary
chaos and turbulence with your team so
make sure you don't do any compromises
when it comes to hiring
interact investors
new investors but be picky
so it is crucial that one of your
founders knows how to
pitch an idea and knows how to network
so to be able to attract investors so if
you have the luxury of choosing your
investors choose them wisely
and by wisely i mean that you have to
find an investor who truly understands
your business model
your challenges who supports you and in
the best case who also has invested in
other companies in the same industry
because this will allow you to to get
inspired or also to to challenge your
strategy
guaranteed true product market true
product market fit
well you have to fully understand your
core customer
um
let's say you're a sweet pot customer so
the customer segment you will start to
target
and if you fully understand what their
needs are you understand what features
they need to solve this needs and so if
you understand your product
segment your customer segment this will
define your product roadmap
so as important as it is to really
understand the needs of your customers
it is likewise important to expand your
segments further because only if you
if you
capture really big market you will be
able to scale really fast so let's say
you have an initial customer let's take
payrock as an example with our sweet
spot initial customer being scale ups in
the software as a service and fintech
industry so we build all features to
fulfill their needs then more and more
enterprise customers
became interested in our product and
that's why
we are now targeting on those and
building more features in the enterprise
area this is by the way why today we are
launching our oracle netsuite
integration here
to build more enterprise features
so also when it comes to a product
market fit the needs can differ widely
when you enter new markets so you might
need different features in germany
than in spain so we tackle this problem
by hiring local experts in all of our
key markets
get your marketing strategy right
so for
like a market you newly created it's
really important to educate customers if
you're in a market that is already
really crowded and competitive it is
really important to get your positioning
right
so
if you have a you need to have a really
clear positioning and communicate it via
a variety of marketing channels to the
customer so that they understand what
you are doing different than the rest in
the market
so
this can happen in in various ways so
for example you can have an out-of-form
billboard live and and measure the brand
traffic or you can attend events and
count the number of leads you will
generate i would recommend that you test
a lot of different channels
make those channels measurable also
brand awareness channels because this
will allow you
when you have the necessary budget and
funds to scale that you have the right
setup
dream big right from the start
walt disney said that to have a truly
creative team you need to have a dreamer
a critic and a
realist
so um for young startups um it's it's
easy like for young startups that face
the challenge of foundation
and um or the pain of growth it's easy
to overly become critical and pragmatic
and this is where you need a dreamer
a dreamer who thinks outside the box
who who sees
what you cannot even think about and um
who's not afraid to fail or to take
risks
so for example when i joined payoff i
actually asked you what is the vision
your vision for for payorg and you said
we will be the biggest bank in the world
without holding a single cent and
frankly at that time i thought
wow that's a bit too big for me maybe a
bit crazy but then i realized that
this vision actually drives the whole
growth of the team
and became kind of the north star for
for the team and for what we have
achieved so i really think that only if
you think a bit too big you will be able
to become a unicorn
thank you
[Music]
we have a mic at the back um so
if anybody has questions uh feel free
and maybe just to add on the talent
because i think attracting one percent
of the talent is easy to say but if you
don't overspend on people
that's not going to happen and for us
that was a key metric
we would rather go and build a plan of
five people instead of 10
but over compensate those five people
and make sure that these guys are fully
compensated and you know we are very
aggressive in attracting the right
people because otherwise head count
doesn't matter if you go get the wrong
people
so there is a
person there
i think the microphone is coming
i was just going to ask on the topic of
talent
is there anything special about your
interview process that you're doing to
make sure that you're finding the right
people
just maybe just to repeat is there
anything special in our recruitment
process
yeah yes
well first of all there are a few
fundamental things so
i myself as a ceo and the other founders
we try to be involved as much as
possible so i spent 80 percent of my
time
interviewing and meeting people which to
me is critical
one of the interesting things we do is
um we do have
eight characteristics for every role
four of those are company-wide and
they're set
work ethic intelligence
you know data-driven
as a person and and being humble
those things should be right and we have
a very clear strategy on what are the
questions you need to ask and what are
the
kind of the good signals and the bad
signals that people would go through
that is going to tell you whether this
person is let's say data driven or
humble and doesn't have a big ego and so
on and so forth so we are trying to
train those people on those four key
company characteristics that really are
making us successful and then four
others are raw specific so it's a pdr
curiosity and so on and so forth so that
is maybe one of the things we do
the other things we do is
we try to be
very careful on how we recruit people so
in general what we did is we never had a
job ad for the first 30 35 people
all of them were recruited and head
hunted and targeted specifically
because we knew exactly who we need and
what we need and we it was much harder
it takes
three to four times
longer time to fill a position
if you just post an ad and get people
but it was the right targeted approach
for us that worked
there is a mic comic maybe
sorry
hi hello hi uh i just wanted to have a
question regarding the uh the market
that you were targeting so you said that
you hired a local person in every market
but how did you decide which market you
want to target and
the part of the targeting different
markets it's your like feature set or
the customers or your pricing models
different per market
so we so first of all how we decided we
focused on the biggest markets
and the richest markets um so it was
about
how big is the addressable market
and
how penetrated is the market from others
so those were the key drivers and also
for us how digital is the market versus
how kind of paper driven is the market
so we had those criterias and we
selected our targets
and for us it was key that we have local
people in those markets
and we localize as much as possible so
we have the website the mobile app
everything is in the local language
customer support customer success sales
bdrs everything is in the local language
all the touch points with you are in
local language
the feature set is a tailor to the
market but it takes time
so you start with the markets where you
have big overlap
that with your capability you can
address the market with let's say 90 of
your features and maybe 10 percent is
local features you need to take for
example today we are launching 60 days
v80 return for the spanish market which
is key thing for these local markets and
we took a year and a half to certify
with the tax authorities in spain so
that we can be a paperless business and
you can actually take a picture with our
app and throw away the paper and not end
up going back from this confidence with
a pile of receipts in your pockets which
i'm sure a lot of you have somewhere
so that was those were key things and
the way you do them in different markets
is different for example the standards
for being paperless in germany uk and so
on are different so the key thing for us
was the addressable market
a likelihood of success based on
competitors
how educated is the market which is
usually pros and cons it's a double
edged sword and you need to be careful
hi there
sorry in the back going back to talent
um did you create like a scalable
process or on hiring and motivating
talents like senior talent to come and
join payhawk
probably these questions also for this
area what made you change
and uh is there any scalability to that
process thanks
so
desi can say what we do but i think
fundamental is that you know the you
know the ceos involved into recruitment
that is extremely important
so for example
um for senior hearts it is really
important for them to get the vision
make sure they are comfortable and they
can actually build a good relationship
with founder because we are peers right
we are team
i have my leadership team and all those
people we are working together deciding
things together and we're on a daily
basis making decisions
and i think that's that's really
important and
[Music]
finding ways to
to show that you have
common values is the first part because
if you find somebody that has your
values and really is a proponent of your
thinking and then show you a market that
is massive so you can really grow your
potential and it is a great opportunity
i think that's the key thing for us we
are entering in a massive market with a
great fit and the opportunity for
somebody let's say we're interviewing
for a sales position let's say on a
director level is massive this person
can go from
let's say he in his previous company he
managed five six people we usually
always hire one level below
we always go for open commerce who we
believe are going to be fundamental and
they can they have been pivotal in their
teams for the success of their
organization so that they can we can
give them the ground for them to grow
and those people really appreciate that
this kind of
you know benefits you give them and you
also ensure that those people are also
scrappy
and
they have very high work ethic
um and this is key for us
for a startup right because at the end
of the day if you come and say i need 45
people from day one that's not going to
fly
yeah so maybe what i can add is um i
think what's a challenge so if you hire
really senior people sometimes they they
expect to let's say
start just managing the team
um but as i also mentioned before we
start to hire senior people first so
this means they also have to be super
hands-on because they will become more
strategic and more the manager person as
they as they would hire their own team
and this is sometimes hard to find maybe
you can say why you rejected three times
and
you can explain why you rejected three
times the offer and then finally decided
to join
oh okay because that was part of the
question why did you join
yes um so in the end so i got an offer
um
two years ago and then i rejected it
actually um but
what the reason behind it was
um
well i wasn't actually ready to change i
was happy in my job and then i talked to
christo again
and we had like
not an interview call but more like a
general call and i got really convinced
of their values and their drive of the
whole founder team so i really talked to
all of them and it somehow got me like
rethink rethink my decision and and yeah
making me join payroll
so never give up
[Music]
you